v3.2: Add data vs serialized Example Object fields (Revised) (#4671)
OAI/OpenAPI-Specification: src/oas.md

The examples can show either data suitable for schema validation, or serialized data as required by tehe containing [Media Type Object](#media-type-object), [Parameter Object](#parameter-object), or [Header Object](#header-object).
This object is typically used in fields named `examples` (plural), and is a [referenceable](#reference-object) alternative to older `example` (singular) fields that do not support referencing or metadata.
The various fields and types of examples are explained in more detail under [Working With Examples](#working-with-examples).

##### Fixed Fields

| Field Name | Type | Description |
| ---- | :----: | ---- |
| <a name="example-summary"></a>summary | `string` | Short description for the example. |
| <a name="example-description"></a>description | `string` | Long description for the example. [CommonMark syntax](https://spec.commonmark.org/) MAY be used for rich text representation. |
| <a name="example-data-value"></a>dataValue | Any | An example of the data structure that MUST be valid according to the relevant [Schema Object](#schema-object).  If this field is present, `externalDataValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. |

> | <a name="example-external-data-value"></a>externalDataValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the data example in a separate document, allowing for values not easily expressed in JSON or YAML.  This is usually only needed when working with binary data. The value MUST be valid according to the relevant Schema Object. If this field is present, then `dataValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. See also the rules for resolving [Relative URI References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |

Author: @hudlow people use `externalValue` now, and as far as I know they use it for JSON values as well as non-JSON values, so for feature parity we have both.  In the case where the serialization is JSON, of course the fields are redundant.  In the case of other serializations, they are not.

And yes, since we're replacing fields (even if the inconsistency was more problematic with `value` than `externalValue`, I do not think it is necessary to re-litigate this, as I consider `externalValue` sufficient precedent.  But if you build a consensus around your position, I will go with whatever @OAI/tsc decides (either formally or by just commenting in favor without others being opposed).

> | <a name="example-external-data-value"></a>externalDataValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the data example in a separate document, allowing for values not easily expressed in JSON or YAML.  This is usually only needed when working with binary data. The value MUST be valid according to the relevant Schema Object. If this field is present, then `dataValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. See also the rules for resolving [Relative URI References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |

Reviewer: > @hudlow people use externalValue now, and as far as I know they use it for JSON values as well as non-JSON values, so for feature parity we have both.

I tried to test this hypothesis; surprisingly, in my unscientific test, even the _first_ assertion was a little shaky.

My methodology was to clone https://github.com/APIs-guru/openapi-directory and grep for `externalValue`. Out of the ~700 API descriptions (not counting multiple versions for one API), only **one** uses `externalValue` _at all_, and they appear to use it only as a serialized value (i.e., matching media type).

<details>
<summary>methodology</summary>

```sh
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/api/v1/config
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/api/v1/config/about
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/api/v1/video-playlists/privacies
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/api/v1/videos/categories
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/api/v1/videos/languages
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/api/v1/videos/licences
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/api/v1/videos/privacies
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/atom+xml:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/video-comments.atom?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/video-comments.json?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/rss+xml:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/video-comments.rss?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/xml:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/video-comments.xml?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            text/xml:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/video-comments.xml?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/atom+xml:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/videos.atom?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/json:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/videos.json?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/rss+xml:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/videos.rss?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            application/xml:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/videos.xml?filter=local
--
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-            text/xml:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-              examples:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml-                nightly:
cpy.re/peertube/5.1.0/openapi.yaml:                  externalValue: https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/videos.xml?filter=local

APIs (main)$ curl "https://peertube2.cpy.re/feeds/video-comments.xml?filter=local" --head -s | grep "content-type"
content-type: application/xml; charset=utf-8
```

</details>

> My inclination here is that since it may be useful, and is harmless to include, it is better to err on the side of keeping it.

I don't see it this way at all; it constrains future directions for the 3.x spec, and it burdens implementors who wish to be comprehensive. And _we can always add it later, if there is demand_.

> | <a name="example-external-data-value"></a>externalDataValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the data example in a separate document, allowing for values not easily expressed in JSON or YAML.  This is usually only needed when working with binary data. The value MUST be valid according to the relevant Schema Object. If this field is present, then `dataValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. See also the rules for resolving [Relative URI References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |

Author: @karenetheridge 

> My inclination here is that since it may be useful, and is harmless to include, it is better to err on the side of keeping it.

Strong agree.  In fact I just needed it yesterday as I was showing two different media types for the same data, where the example data value was sizeable so putting it in a file and using `externalDataValue` in both Example Objects was much preferred over inlining a non-trivial example twice and having to maintain it in both places.

I'm quite convinced of its usefulness, and see no real way in which this causes problems down the line.

| <a name="example-serialized-value"></a>serializedValue | `string` | An example of the serialized form of the value, including encoding and escaping as described under [Validating Examples](#validating-examples).  If `dataValue` or `externalDataValue` are present, then this field SHOULD contain the serialization of the given data.  Otherwise, it SHOULD be the valid serialization of a data value that itself MUST be valid as described for `dataValue`.  This field SHOULD NOT be used if the serialization format is JSON, as the data form is easier to work with. If this field is present, `externalSerializedValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. |

> | <a name="example-eternal-serialized-value"></a>externalSerializedValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the serialized example in a separate document, allowing for values not easily or readably expressed in JSON or YAML strings.  If `dataValue` or `externalDataValue` are present, then this field SHOULD identify a serialization of the given data.  Otherwise, the value SHOULD be a valid serialization as described for `serializedValue`.  If this field is present, `serializedValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. See also the rules for resolving [Relative References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| <a name="example-external-serialized-value"></a>externalSerializedValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the serialized example in a separate document, allowing for values not easily or readably expressed in JSON or YAML strings.  If `dataValue` or `externalDataValue` are present, then this field SHOULD identify a serialization of the given data.  Otherwise, the value SHOULD be a valid serialization as described for `serializedValue`.  If this field is present, `serializedValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. See also the rules for resolving [Relative References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |
```

> | <a name="example-data-value"></a>dataValue | Any | An example of the data structure that MUST be valid according to the relevant [Schema Object](#schema-object).  If this field is present, `externalDataValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. |
> | <a name="example-external-data-value"></a>externalDataValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the data example in a separate document, which is otherwise treated identically to `dataValue` once parsed, with the same validity requirements. If this field is present, then `dataValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. See also the rules for resolving [Relative URI References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |
> | <a name="example-serialized-value"></a>serializedValue | `string` | An example of the serialized form of the value, including encoding and escaping as described under [Validating Examples](#validating-examples).  If `dataValue` or `externalDataValue` are present, then this field SHOULD contain the serialization of the given data.  Otherwise, it SHOULD be the valid serialization of a data value that itself MUST be valid as described for `dataValue`.  This field SHOULD NOT be used if the serialization format is JSON, as the data form is easier to work with. If this field is present, `externalSerializedValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. |
> | <a name="example-external-serialized-value"></a>externalSerializedValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the serialized example in a separate document, allowing for values not easily or readably expressed in JSON or YAML strings.  If `dataValue` or `externalDataValue` are present, then this field SHOULD identify a serialization of the given data.  Otherwise, the value SHOULD be a valid serialization as described for `serializedValue`.  If this field is present, `serializedValue`, `value`, and `externalValue` MUST be absent. See also the rules for resolving [Relative References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |
> | <a name="example-value"></a>value | Any | Embedded literal example. The `value` field and `externalValue` field are mutually exclusive. To represent examples of media types that cannot naturally be represented in JSON or YAML, use a string value to contain the example, escaping where necessary. |
> | <a name="example-external-value"></a>externalValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the literal example. This provides the capability to reference examples that cannot easily be included in JSON or YAML documents. The `value` field and `externalValue` field are mutually exclusive. See the rules for resolving [Relative References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |

Reviewer: Below is my proposal based on ongoing conversations.

```suggestion
| <a name="example-data-value"></a>dataValue | Any | An example of the data structure that MUST be valid according to the relevant [Schema Object](#schema-object). This field MUST not be used with `dataValueReference` or `value`. |
| <a name="example-external-data-value"></a>dataValueReference | [Reference Object](#reference-object) | A reference to an example of the data structure that MUST be valid according to the relevant [Schema Object](#schema-object). This field MUST not be used with `dataValue` or `value`. |
| <a name="example-serialized-value"></a>serializedValue | `string` | An example of the Unicode-serialized form of a value that MUST be valid according to the relevant [Schema Object](#schema-object) and includes encoding and escaping as described under [Validating Examples](#validating-examples). If `dataValue` or `dataValueReference` are present, then this field SHOULD contain a serialization of the given data value. This field MUST not be used with `value` or `externalValue`. |
| <a name="example-value"></a>value | Any | An example value valid as described for either `dataValue` or `serializedValue`. This field MUST not be used with `dataValue`, `dataValueReference`, `serializedValue`, or `externalValue`. |
| <a name="example-external-value"></a>externalValue | `string` | A URI that identifies the binary-serialized form of the value. This provides the capability to reference examples that cannot easily be included in JSON or YAML documents, as well as to demonstrate binary encoding for any value. If `dataValue` or `dataValueReference` are present, then this field SHOULD identify a serialization of the given data. This field MUST not be used with `value` or `externalValue`. See the rules for resolving [Relative References](#relative-references-in-api-description-uris). |
```

One part of this analysis involved mapping out possible interpretations of the existing values:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f160f58b-45b1-4ef3-8065-0aca74ae913d)

Some general thoughts:
- Unicode and binary serialization are importantly different.
- `$ref` behavior is unique for its implicit deserialization and parsing of the target document.

On the ambiguity of `externalValue`, while it is conceivable that someone has implemented a `$ref`-style abstraction over `externalValue`:
- I don't see anything in previous versions of the OpenAPI spec that would suggest this is supported or encourage it. The language itself doesn't imply the same dichotomy as the language for `value` and the examples don't show a JSON (or YAML) document being referenced for a non-JSON media type.
- I can't find any real-world examples of OpenAPI documents that seem to assume a `$ref`-style abstraction.

> @karenetheridge @hudlow @mikekistler in addition to the https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/4671#discussion_r2145488723 for externalDataValue (which arose without me looking for such a thing), I also ended up using it in [the XML example updates](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/4711/files#diff-a662b9afa95a60c2a67cc48014a8d5e00fa6ab2bd5ba2a54531674a5dd398c73R3700) because again I needed to show the same input data serialized in two different ways in two different contexts. While this second use case is more contrived, it's not unrealistic, and that's two that have come up without me particularly trying to make it happen.

Okay, I'm sold, but I think we need to leverage a reference object to clarify that (1) this can be done in-document and that (2) if it's done out-of-document the implicit deserialization/parsing process applies. Hence the proposal for `dataValueReference` above.

> even if `externalValue` is well-defined as behaving like `externalSerializedValue`, the naming asymmetry is problematic

I actually think the naming asymmetry is a feature and not a bug because:
1. `externalValue` lacks $ref-style behavior
2. `externalValue` is a binary serialization unlike `serializedValue` which is a Unicode serialization

Author: @hudlow it sounds like you have a thoroughly thought-through proposal here- I'm not weighing in on the merits because I have only had time to skim it, but it definitely looks worth a proper standalone write-up/PR.  I've done two rounds of PRs on this subject and don't have the bandwidth for a third, but if you open your own PR I can close this one in favor of it.  Feel free to lift whatever you want from this one, or start over completely, whatever works best for you.

You might also want to take over #4672, and possibly #4648 depending on how that dovetails with your proposal, but the others (particularly #4673) I'll keep and update as needed with the outcome.  There are some more examples to update that I hadn't gotten around to posting yet- I can finish those once you've sorted out the new fields, or you can do them if you prefer.  But I need to focus on finishing up `multipart` and other media type things such as the media type registry.

Reviewer: @handrews busy week ahead, but I will get something together as soon as I can. I'll aim to have it done by Thursday, but not positive how realistic that is.

Author: Thanks @hudlow — I have more than enough to occupy the Thursday call with `multipart` and media registry things this week if you want to target next week :-)

Author: @hudlow having had a chance to consider this in more detail, it makes sense even if it is not how I would do it.

Personally, I find your distinction between "unicode serialization" and "binary serialization" to be far more confusing than useful- YAML/JSON is unicode, and that's all you need to know.  "Unicode serialization" sounds like something involving escape sequences of the sort that we actually _don't_ want.  But if you can sell the TSC on it, I won't block it.  I continue to dislike it and find it unnecessarily confusing, though, and think it makes too big of a deal out of things that other specs handle just fine.

Regardless of all that, `dataReference` needs to be `dataRef` and take a URI-reference (not a Reference Object) for consistency with `operationRef` and possibly something else I'm forgetting.  You would also need a `components` entry for it.

Reviewer: @handrews thanks for the additional feedback — will work on refining the language.

Each of these fields has slightly different considerations.

###### Choosing Which Field(s) to Use

The Schema Object's fields are used to show example values without regard to how they might be formatted as parameters or within media type representations.
The `examples` array is part of JSON Schema and is the preferred way to include examples in the Schema Object, while `example` is retained purely for compatibility with older versions of the OpenAPI Specification.

The singular `example` field in non-Schema Objects is a shorthand for a single Example Object using only the `value` field, and all guidance for the `value` field applies to it.

As originally conceived, the Schema Object's keywords are intended to show data as it would be validated by the containing Schema Object, while the fields in the other Objects were intended to show the serialized media type, parameter, or header.

> However, the non-Schema Object fields allowed serialized forms that could be "easily" represented as JSON or JSON-compatible YAML to be shown as inline data structures rather than serialized to strings, which means that in the most common case (`appication/json` documents), this sort of "serialized" example would be represented in the same way as the validation-ready Schema Object examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the non-Schema Object fields allowed serialized forms that could be "easily" represented as JSON or JSON-compatible YAML to be shown as inline data structures rather than serialized to strings, which means that in the most common case (`application/json` documents), this sort of "serialized" example would be represented in the same way as the validation-ready Schema Object examples.
```

Furthermore, some parameters and headers are simple enough that there is no difference between the serialized and validation-ready forms.

Possibly due to these ambiguities, many implementations appear to have implemented the fields that existed prior to version 3.2 of this specification as requiring validation-ready data structures.

> For this reason, OpenAPI Description authors who want portable behavior with examples that are not for `application/json` media types or trivial strings without any formatting or escaping are RECOMMENDED to use the new fields (`dataValue` or `externalDataValue` for validation-ready data, and `serializedValue` or `externalSerializedValue` for serialized forms)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this reason, OpenAPI Description authors who want portable behavior with examples that are not for `application/json` media types or trivial strings without any formatting or escaping are RECOMMENDED to use the new fields (`dataValue` or `externalDataValue` for validation-ready data, and `serializedValue` or `externalSerializedValue` for serialized forms).
```

In addition, it can be challenging to correlate the validation-ready Schema Object example with serialized Example Object examples when all are part of shared Objects reached through (possibly multiple) references.
Authors who wish to clearly show serialized and unserialized forms of the same data together are RECOMMENDED to use the new fields in the Example Object to do so.

> Due to the lack of any format for mixing JSON Schema data model-compatible data with binary data (as might happen in a `multipart` media type), such examples can only be given using the `externalSerializedValue` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to the lack of any format for mixing JSON Schema data-model compatible data with binary data (as might happen in a `multipart` media type), such examples can only be given using the `externalSerializedValue` field.
```
I learned that if three consecutive words belong together, the first two can be connected with a dash (as opposed to German, where the three words would just be strung together into one word).

Also this seems to mean "compatible with the data model of JSON Schema", and not "model-compatible with data for JSON Schema" which doesn't make any sense to me.

Because examples using these fields represent the final serialized form of the data, they SHALL _override_ any `example` in the corresponding Schema Object.

###### Validating Examples

> Tooling implementations MAY choose to validate compatibility automatically, and reject the example value(s) if incompatible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tooling implementations MAY choose to automatically validate compatibility, and reject the example value(s) if incompatible.
```

Author: I think this was just copied from prior language so I'd rather leave it.

If either of `dataValue` or `externalDataValue` are also present, the serialized value MUST be a serialization of the data value, and SHOULD be a valid according to the serialization format.

When using `serializedValue`, the value MUST be a string that is suitably escaped for inclusion in JSON or YAML in addition to any escaping that is part of the target format.
See [Character Encodings and Binary Data](#character-encodings-and-binary-data) for details.

The `externalSerializedValue` field supports any format for the external value.
Note that this serialization may or may not exactly match what is transmitted over the wire, as different versions of HTTP use different text or binary encodings, and HTTP content may be subject to compression or other transformations not captured in the OpenAPI Description.

The `value` and `externalValue` fields were intended to hold serialized values, with `value` allowing inline JSON/YAML structures in place of a string if the serialization format is JSON or otherwise compatible with JSON/YAML.

> However, many implementations treat them as data values, so these fields are ambiguous and not interoperable in practice.

Reviewer: I haven't found any evidence of implementations that treat `externalValue` as a data value, and the text of 3.0 and 3.1 doesn't seem to imply that an `externalValue` could be anything but a serialized value.

Author: (And to anyone reading who is wondering why I'm saying "build a consensus" instead of just accepting the argument, it's because I don't feel able to make a call one way or the other, still prefer my position, and the outcome shouldn't come down to "Henry wins by default because he posted the PR")

Reviewer: Responded here: https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/4671#discussion_r2143510760

###### Character Encodings and Binary Data

For `externalDataValue`, it is always the parsed data that is significant, not its character encoding.

While JSON Schema allows for applying schemas to data outside of its data model, this allowance is intended to support consistent use of Schema Objects, including fields such as `readOnly` that do not impact JSON Schema's validation outcome.
No standard format suitable for passing such non-JSON data to JSON Schema has been defined, and therefore data that is outside of the JSON data model cannot be represented with `dataValue` or `externalDataValue`, and MUST use `serializedValue` or `externalSerializedValue`.

> Note that `serializedValue`, which MUST be a string, is by necessity a sequence of Unicode code points, which may need to be re-encoded based on the character set or other constraints of the target location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that `serializedValue`, which MUST be a string, is by necessity a sequence of Unicode code points, which will need to be encoded based on the character set or other constraints of the target location.
```

Nit: I don't think a code point vector is encoded at all.

This conversion is purely one of encoding.  All escaping necessary to reduce the example to the set of characters valid for the target location (e.g. URI percent-encoding) MUST be included in the `serializedValue`.
If the target location's encoding is ambiguous, `externalSerializedValue` can be used to demonstrate the exact serialization, including character set encoding, that is intended.

Per [[!RFC8259]] [Section 8.2](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259.html#section-8.2), using escape sequences that cannot encode Unicode characters to represent binary data is not portable and may cause runtime errors.

> Therefore, data formats such those including binary data that are not always representable as Unicode code points SHOULD use `externalSerializedValue`.

Reviewer 3: > JSON strings cannot ever represent binary data because parsed JSON only gives the consumer access to a vector of code points  
> a JSON string does not ever represent a bit sequence  

That's the exact point I was trying to make as well, with respect to `dataValue`! :)
